case-studies/gzpastorello.md, before:

##### Title

Generation of uniform data products for AmeriFlux and FLUXNET

##### Introduction

I'm [Gilberto Pastorello](http://www.gilbertozp.org/), a [Research Scientist](http://crd.lbl.gov/departments/data-science-and-technology/idf/staff/gilberto-pastorello/) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, doing research on life-cycle management of scientific data, encompassing data and metadata structures and linkages, data quality and data uncertainty quantification, and end-to-end data systems. The part of my work described here involves development of data processing pipelines and data management solutions within the environmental domain. This work is done for the [AmeriFlux](http://ameriflux.lbl.gov/) and [FLUXNET](http://fluxnet.fluxdata.org/) research networks.

##### Workflow diagram

[Diagram](gzpastorello.pdf)

##### Workflow narrative

Multiple Science Teams collect carbon, water, and energy fluxes from over 800 field sites across the world. Currently, more than 400 of these sites share their data with regional networks such as [AmeriFlux](http://ameriflux.lbl.gov/), allowing the creation of data products with a global scope for the [FLUXNET](http://fluxnet.fluxdata.org/) network. These sites are operated independently and methods for data collection, processing, and data quality control by the Science Teams can vary significantly. Our workflow aims at processing these heterogeneous data sets to generate data products that are comparable across these sites. A general view of the steps in our workflow is shown in the figure. In this context, reproducibility is strongly related to identifying and documenting data quality control checks, parameterizations for processing, sequences of correction steps, and data filtering.

The pipeline is executed every time new data are sent to us by the Science Teams. We keep track of multiple submissions with a combination of simple incremental counters for versions and timestamps -- logs of data transfers are stored in a relational database. The frequency of data submissions can range from daily to yearly updates from a Science Team. All executions of the pipeline generate a version, with successful executions being made public after being vetted by the Science Teams.

The first few steps are related to data quality and aim at identifying serious quality issues and making data quality more uniform across sites. Specialized algorithms and visualization methods are used in these steps. Automated generation of flags and manual inspection of data sets are done first, followed by the compilation of metrics about the data and checks. Any decision to change the data sets is first shared with the Science Team and confirmed before being executed. Major issues are identified and solutions are developed in collaboration with Science Teams. A custom issue tracking system developed by us is used to keep track of interactions with Science Teams and the issues being addressed in the data sets. The information in this issue tracking system is private and accessible only to our team and the Science Team for the field site providing the data, but reports and status information from this system can be made available with a published data product. Changes to data are also documented in log files and quality flags that are added to the data sets themselves, these being made available along with data products.  Changes and corrections generate a new version of the input data and the pipeline starts again from this new version.

The central portion of the workflow includes the processing steps for heat, carbon and micrometeorological variables. The parameters used to configure these executions are stored with the data sets, and specialized checks are also executed within each step. The results from most of these checks are stored as quality flags added to the data sets. Versions of the code used for these steps are also recorded in the data set's metadata.

The product merging step reformats the data into common structures and combines quality information into quality flags at a higher level of abstraction, to simplify using the data sets. The uncertainty quantification step generates quantiles representing uncertainty intervals originating from each of the processing steps, also becoming part of the data products.

The pr multiple team members understand and can generate products, it is much more likely that problems will be identified early, questions from external members of the community will be answered more easily, and funding agencies will have documented product releases (data and software), which can be combined with other types of publications in assessments of scientific impact.

##### What does "reproducibility" mean to you in general and/or in the particular context of your case study?

For this case study, reproducibility means being able to apply standard methods to process heterogeneous data sets to generate comparable data products. The data sources for our processing are distributed across very different ecosystems, with data acquired, processed, and quality checked by different teams. The data products we generate from these data sets need to be in the same scales and have comparable levels of quality, representativity, etc.

##### General questions about reproducibility [Optional]

5) Are there any broad reproducibility best practices that you'd recommend for researchers in your field?

While version control is widely adopted for software code, this is not necessarily the case for data. Consistently keeping track of versions of a data set at a minimum helps with data changes and is well worth the extra effort. Another lesson we learned early was that issue/bug tracking ideas and tools can simplify data management activities, and can also be valuable in building the history of a data set and generating its documentation.


6) Would you recommend any specific websites, training courses, or books for learning more about reproducibility?

While not always featuring fully developed practices or tools, reproducibility scientific events (and their published proceedings) often showcase new and interesting ideas. Examples are the International Provenance and Annotation Workshop (IPAW) and the Workshop on the Theory and Practice of Provenance (TaPP).

Commit message:

Edit formatting and clean up all case studies for compilation

case-studies/gzpastorello.md, after:

---
title: Generation of Uniform Data Products for AmeriFlux and FLUXNET
running: Data for AmeriFlux and FLUXNET
author: Gilberto Pastorello
---

I'm [Gilberto Pastorello](http://www.gilbertozp.org/), a [Research Scientist](http://crd.lbl.gov/departments/data-science-and-technology/idf/staff/gilberto-pastorello/) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, doing research on life-cycle management of scientific data, encompassing data and metadata structures and linkages, data quality and data uncertainty quantification, and end-to-end data systems. The part of my work described here involves development of data processing pipelines and data management solutions within the environmental domain. This work is done for the [AmeriFlux](http://ameriflux.lbl.gov/) and [FLUXNET](http://fluxnet.fluxdata.org/) research networks.

# Workflow

![Diagram](gzpastorello.pdf){width=100%}\

Multiple Science Teams collect carbon, water, and energy fluxes from over 800 field sites across the world. Currently, more than 400 of these sites share their data with regional networks such as [AmeriFlux](http://ameriflux.lbl.gov/), allowing the creation of data products with a global scope for the [FLUXNET](http://fluxnet.fluxdata.org/) network. These sites are operated independently and methods for data collection, processing, and data quality control by the Science Teams can vary significantly. Our workflow aims at processing these heterogeneous data sets to generate data products that are comparable across these sites. A general view of the steps in our workflow is shown in the figure. In this context, reproducibility is strongly related to identifying and documenting data quality control checks, parameterizations for processing, sequences of correction steps, and data filtering.

The pipeline is executed every time new data are sent to us by the Science Teams. We keep track of multiple submissions with a combination of simple incremental counters for versions and timestamps -- logs of data transfers are stored in a relational database. The frequency of data submissions can range from daily to yearly updates from a Science Team. All executions of the pipeline generate a version, with successful executions being made public after being vetted by the Science Teams.

The first few steps are related to data quality and aim at identifying serious quality issues and making data quality more uniform across sites. Specialized algorithms and visualization methods are used in these steps. Automated generation of flags and manual inspection of data sets are done first, followed by the compilation of metrics about the data and checks. Any decision to change the data sets is first shared with the Science Team and confirmed before being executed. Major issues are identified and solutions are developed in collaboration with Science Teams. A custom issue tracking system developed by us is used to keep track of interactions with Science Teams and the issues being addressed in the data sets. The information in this issue tracking system is private and accessible only to our team and the Science Team for the field site providing the data, but reports and status information from this system can be made available with a published data product. Changes to data are also documented in log files and quality flags that are added to the data sets themselves, these being made available along with data products.  Changes and corrections generate a new version of the input data and the pipeline starts again from this new version.

The central portion of the workflow includes the processing steps for heat, carbon and micrometeorological variables. The parameters used to configure these executions are stored with the data sets, and specialized checks are also executed within each step. The results from most of these checks are stored as quality flags added to the data sets. Versions of the code used for these steps are also recorded in the data set's metadata.

The product merging step reformats the data into common structures and combines quality information into quality flags at a higher level of abstraction, to simplify using the data sets. The uncertainty quantification step generates quantiles representing uncertainty intervals originating from each of the processing steps, also becoming part of the data products.

The pr multiple team members understand and can generate products, it is much more likely that problems will be identified early, questions from external members of the community will be answered more easily, and funding agencies will have documented product releases (data and software), which can be combined with other types of publications in assessments of scientific impact.

# Questions

## What does "reproducibility" mean to you?

For this case study, reproducibility means being able to apply standard methods to process heterogeneous data sets to generate comparable data products. The data sources for our processing are distributed across very different ecosystems, with data acquired, processed, and quality checked by different teams. The data products we generate from these data sets need to be in the same scales and have comparable levels of quality, representativity, etc.

## Are there any best practices that you'd recommend for researchers in your field?

While version control is widely adopted for software code, this is not necessarily the case for data. Consistently keeping track of versions of a data set at a minimum helps with data changes and is well worth the extra effort. Another lesson we learned early was that issue/bug tracking ideas and tools can simplify data management activities, and can also be valuable in building the history of a data set and generating its documentation.

## Would you recommend any specific resources for learning more about reproducibility?

While not always featuring fully developed practices or tools, reproducibility scientific events (and their published proceedings) often showcase new and interesting ideas. Examples are the International Provenance and Annotation Workshop (IPAW) and the Workshop on the Theory and Practice of Provenance (TaPP).
