case-studies/khuff.md, before:

##### Title

Developing an Open, Modular Simulation Framework for Nuclear Fuel Cycle Analysis

##### Introduction

I am Kathryn (Katy) Huff, and I am a Nuclear Science and Security Consortium
postdoctoral scholar in the Nuclear Engineering Department and a Data Science
Fellow with the Berkeley Institute for Data Science.  My research includes
computational nuclear fuel cycle analysis and computational simulation of
coupled, transient, nuclear reactor physics.

Improving the safety and sustainability of nuclear power requires improved
nuclear reactor designs, fuel cycle strategies, and waste-disposal concepts.
The systems are sufficiently complex that breakthrough advancements may emerge
when modern data methodologies are applied to their simulation. In particular,
faithful assessments of potential nuclear fuel cycles require dynamic, discrete 
facility, discrete-material simulations of the mining, milling, transmutation, 
reprocessing, and disposal of nuclear materials as well as the production of 
energy and movement of capital. 

This case study is an overview of the workflow behind the Cyclus nuclear fuel 
cycle simulation framework -- a tool for exactly that kind of modeling, 
simulation, and analysis. The workflow described used to create a software tool 
that other nuclear engineers can use easily, modify quickly, and contribute to 
when they need to customize behavior or model a different technology.

##### Workflow diagram

![Diagram](khuff.pdf)

##### Workflow narrative

I and a group of geographically-dispersed researchers (graduate students and
professors) collectively develop and maintain an agent-based simulation
framework called Cyclus. We also develop and maintain plug-in models
representing the agents in the simulation. These agents  model the mining,
milling, fabrication, transmutation, and disposal of nuclear material in the
_nuclear fuel cycle_.

Cyclus is a C++ code base. The configuration and build system is created from a
combination of Python and CMake (a crossplatform automatic makefile 
configuration system) and supports both Linux and MacOS operating
systems. Our input validation library accepts either xml or json input files.
The simulator accordingly conducts a simulation which generates an output
database in either SQL or HDF5 format which can be traversed by a separately
developed graphical user interface.

As we develop this software, we rely on a number of best practices to ensure
reproducibility.

When a large-scale enhancement is needed, a Cyclus Enhancement Proposal (CEP) is
proposed and discussed among the development team. Smaller enhancements are
discussed as issues in GitHub.  Once approved, the enhancement is implemented
and a pull request is made in GitHub. Our automated continuous integration
server (BatLab) runs the full suite of unit, integration, and regression tests.
Before a proposed change is allowed into Cyclus, it must be covered by a test
and all tests must pass.

Unit tests cover code units like functions and are implemented using the
GoogleTest framework. Integration and regression tests are performed by running
sample simulations and verifying that results match predictions or previous
results. A set of standard input files are run, then the output is inspected
and compared via Nose, a unit testing framework in Python.

Similarly, API changes must be documented as required by the Cyclus
documentation CEP. The documentation for the current stable branch and the
development branch are both provided on the Cyclus website using Doxygen and
Sphinx, which are both automatic documentation systems that rely on the code 
comments in the C++ and Python code, respectively.

Finally, we use the Google C++ style guide to make our code as consistently
formatted as possible.

When the change is made, a developer begins to conduct a particular analysis by
creating an input file. That input file is provided to the Cyclus framework and
validated by its input validation framework. According to the input file, a
simulation is run. The ouput database that is produced contains important
metadata about the simulation. It contains:

- a complete copy of the input file
- the commit hash of the current version of the Cyclus code
- and commit hashes for all necessary plugins retrieved from the Cyclus ecosystem.

That database, containing both data and metadata can then be analyzed by the 
user. When analyzing the databse, a choice is made by the user about how to 
interact with the data. The Cyclus development team has provided a GUI and a 
Go library (called CyAn) with which the database (in either SQL or HDF5 format) 
can be accessed and brought into memory for vizualization and analysis. 
Additionally, many user-developers have their own set of Python scripts that 
can do this stage of tasks. Given the universal nature of these database 
formats, most common scripting languages can be used to extract the data and 
metadata efficiently, so many options exist. 

In summary, the research workflow in this framework has the following
steps :

- If necessary, a developer proposes a change to support their analysis
- The change is made including passing tests and satisfactory documentation
- It is reviewed and pulled into the master branch
- The software is rebuilt and installed using our build system
- A simulation is defined in json or xml
- The input file is run and an HDF5 or SQL database results
- The database is analyzed with a separate GUI, python scripts, or a Go library
- A collaborative paper is created in LaTeX on GitHub
- All input files contributing to the analysis are contained in the repository holding the document

All of these steps are conducted in the context of git and GitHub.

##### Pain points

Build systems are painful. In particular, cross platform configuration and
builds are an enormous time-sink for our research group.  There are a number of reasons for this.

First, supporting C++ builds on Windows
is sufficiently difficult that we abandoned supporting that platform.

Also, due to the physics-based solvers and optimization calculations in our
simulations, external library dependencies are essential to Cylcus. We rely on
libraries like Boost and LibXML2 to facilitate development, and we rely on
libraries like Blas, Lapack, and COIN for mathematical solvers. For this
reason, new developers spend a non-trivial bulk of their spin-up time building
and installing the dependencies necessary to install Cyclus on their particular
platforms.

Finally, our continuous integration system relies on our ability to create
scripts that build, install, and test Cyclus. For this, we use a set of servers
at the University of Wisconsin called the BatLab. Unfortunately, BatLab has a
few problems. Because of the proprietary nature of MacOSX, it cannot run truly
MacOSX instances. It runs, instead, darwin servers that mimic the behavior of
MacOSX. For this reason, idiosyncratic failures apparent in Mavericks and
Yosemite but not Darwin cannot be caught before entering the code-base.
Additionally, BatLab is somewhat unpredictable and inflexible. Since the
behavior of BatLab undergoes a lot of churn, our continuous integration suite
is sometimes rendered completely useless.


##### Key benefits

The [Cyclus Enhancement Proposal (CEP)
strategy](http://fuelcycle.org/cep/cep0.html) was a bright workflow choice
that was inspired by the analogous strategy in the Python community (PEPs). I
recommend this to any research group that values strategic planning, consensus,
and thoughtful development. A discussion of our workflow around these 
proposals can be found [here](http://fuelcycle.org/cep/cep1.html).

Fundamentally, a CEP is :

> a design document providing information to the Cyclus community, or describing a new
> feature or process for Cyclus and related projects in its ecosystem. The CEP
> should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale
> for the feature.

CEPs document major new features, community discussions, and documentation of theory or
design not captured by the in-code documentation. Because they are maintained
alongside the website source code in a version controlled repository,
provenance of the discussion surrounding their acceptance is maintained.

##### Key tools [Optional]

We use CMake to configure and build our software. Much more human readable than
the configuration files within the GNU autotools suite, CMake makes our lives
easier.

The continuous integration system, though difficult to implement due to build
issues, has decreased development time. It would not be possible without CMake,
GoogleTest, and Nose.

##### What does "reproducibility" mean to you in general and/or in the particular context of your case study?

A reproducible research product is one that has been sufficiently documented,
well-constructed, and preserved for its results to be recreated by some
external researcher or group.


##### General questions about reproducibility [Optional]


1) Why do you think that reproducibility in your domain is important?

My domain, nuclear engineering, is one where precision and accuracy are both of
utmost importance to both human and environmental outcomes. Any conclusions
drawn by science can only make an impact in the real world if they can meet the
standards set out by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. For this,
reproducibility is paramount.

2) How or where did you learn the reproducible practices described in your case study? Mentors, classes, workshops, etc.

I learned these practices primarily from my advisor, Paul P.H. Wilson at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. I also learned from colleagues in The Hacker
Within, the Scientific Python community, and Software Carpentry.

3) What do you see as the major pitfalls to doing reproducible research in your domain, and do you have any suggestions for working around these? Examples could include legal, logistical, human, or technical challenges.

One major problem is export control. Making software and data open source is
restricted by the US Department of Energy, in some cases.

4) What do you view as the major incentives for doing reproducible research?

- **Fear.** The fear of retractions due to faulty software or data can be
  reduced by enforcing transparent reproducible practices, which tend to reduce
  the likelihood of being accused of scientific fraud.
- **Surprise.** Six months after a paper is submitted, the surprise of no
  longer recalling your own thought process is unpleasant. To avoid it,
  reproducible practices can help you reproduce your present work in the future.
- **Ruthless Efficiency.** The automation inherent in reproducible
  workflows, makes tweaking and re-running of simulations and analysis very
  efficient.

Commit message:

Edit formatting and clean up all case studies for compilation

case-studies/khuff.md, after:

---
title: Developing an Open, Modular Simulation Framework for Nuclear Fuel Cycle Analysis
running: Nuclear Fuel Cycle Analysis
author: Kathryn Huff
---

I am Kathryn (Katy) Huff, and I am a Nuclear Science and Security Consortium
postdoctoral scholar in the Nuclear Engineering Department and a Data Science
Fellow with the Berkeley Institute for Data Science.  My research includes
computational nuclear fuel cycle analysis and computational simulation of
coupled, transient, nuclear reactor physics.

Improving the safety and sustainability of nuclear power requires improved
nuclear reactor designs, fuel cycle strategies, and waste-disposal concepts.
The systems are sufficiently complex that breakthrough advancements may emerge
when modern data methodologies are applied to their simulation. In particular,
faithful assessments of potential nuclear fuel cycles require dynamic, discrete 
facility, discrete-material simulations of the mining, milling, transmutation, 
reprocessing, and disposal of nuclear materials as well as the production of 
energy and movement of capital. 

This case study is an overview of the workflow behind the Cyclus nuclear fuel 
cycle simulation framework -- a tool for exactly that kind of modeling, 
simulation, and analysis. The workflow described used to create a software tool 
that other nuclear engineers can use easily, modify quickly, and contribute to 
when they need to customize behavior or model a different technology.

# Workflow

![Diagram](khuff.pdf){width=100%}\

I and a group of geographically-dispersed researchers (graduate students and
professors) collectively develop and maintain an agent-based simulation
framework called Cyclus. We also develop and maintain plug-in models
representing the agents in the simulation. These agents  model the mining,
milling, fabrication, transmutation, and disposal of nuclear material in the
_nuclear fuel cycle_.

Cyclus is a C++ code base. The configuration and build system is created from a
combination of Python and CMake (a crossplatform automatic makefile 
configuration system) and supports both Linux and MacOS operating
systems. Our input validation library accepts either xml or json input files.
The simulator accordingly conducts a simulation which generates an output
database in either SQL or HDF5 format which can be traversed by a separately
developed graphical user interface.

As we develop this software, we rely on a number of best practices to ensure
reproducibility.

When a large-scale enhancement is needed, a Cyclus Enhancement Proposal (CEP) is
proposed and discussed among the development team. Smaller enhancements are
discussed as issues in GitHub.  Once approved, the enhancement is implemented
and a pull request is made in GitHub. Our automated continuous integration
server (BatLab) runs the full suite of unit, integration, and regression tests.
Before a proposed change is allowed into Cyclus, it must be covered by a test
and all tests must pass.

Unit tests cover code units like functions and are implemented using the
GoogleTest framework. Integration and regression tests are performed by running
sample simulations and verifying that results match predictions or previous
results. A set of standard input files are run, then the output is inspected
and compared via Nose, a unit testing framework in Python.

Similarly, API changes must be documented as required by the Cyclus
documentation CEP. The documentation for the current stable branch and the
development branch are both provided on the Cyclus website using Doxygen and
Sphinx, which are both automatic documentation systems that rely on the code 
comments in the C++ and Python code, respectively.

Finally, we use the Google C++ style guide to make our code as consistently
formatted as possible.

When the change is made, a developer begins to conduct a particular analysis by
creating an input file. That input file is provided to the Cyclus framework and
validated by its input validation framework. According to the input file, a
simulation is run. The ouput database that is produced contains important
metadata about the simulation. It contains:

- a complete copy of the input file
- the commit hash of the current version of the Cyclus code
- and commit hashes for all necessary plugins retrieved from the Cyclus ecosystem.

That database, containing both data and metadata can then be analyzed by the 
user. When analyzing the databse, a choice is made by the user about how to 
interact with the data. The Cyclus development team has provided a GUI and a 
Go library (called CyAn) with which the database (in either SQL or HDF5 format) 
can be accessed and brought into memory for vizualization and analysis. 
Additionally, many user-developers have their own set of Python scripts that 
can do this stage of tasks. Given the universal nature of these database 
formats, most common scripting languages can be used to extract the data and 
metadata efficiently, so many options exist. 

In summary, the research workflow in this framework has the following
steps :

- If necessary, a developer proposes a change to support their analysis
- The change is made including passing tests and satisfactory documentation
- It is reviewed and pulled into the master branch
- The software is rebuilt and installed using our build system
- A simulation is defined in json or xml
- The input file is run and an HDF5 or SQL database results
- The database is analyzed with a separate GUI, python scripts, or a Go library
- A collaborative paper is created in LaTeX on GitHub
- All input files contributing to the analysis are contained in the repository holding the document

All of these steps are conducted in the context of git and GitHub.

# Pain points

Build systems are painful. In particular, cross platform configuration and
builds are an enormous time-sink for our research group.  There are a number of reasons for this.

First, supporting C++ builds on Windows
is sufficiently difficult that we abandoned supporting that platform.

Also, due to the physics-based solvers and optimization calculations in our
simulations, external library dependencies are essential to Cylcus. We rely on
libraries like Boost and LibXML2 to facilitate development, and we rely on
libraries like Blas, Lapack, and COIN for mathematical solvers. For this
reason, new developers spend a non-trivial bulk of their spin-up time building
and installing the dependencies necessary to install Cyclus on their particular
platforms.

Finally, our continuous integration system relies on our ability to create
scripts that build, install, and test Cyclus. For this, we use a set of servers
at the University of Wisconsin called the BatLab. Unfortunately, BatLab has a
few problems. Because of the proprietary nature of MacOSX, it cannot run truly
MacOSX instances. It runs, instead, darwin servers that mimic the behavior of
MacOSX. For this reason, idiosyncratic failures apparent in Mavericks and
Yosemite but not Darwin cannot be caught before entering the code-base.
Additionally, BatLab is somewhat unpredictable and inflexible. Since the
behavior of BatLab undergoes a lot of churn, our continuous integration suite
is sometimes rendered completely useless.

# Key benefits

The [Cyclus Enhancement Proposal (CEP)
strategy](http://fuelcycle.org/cep/cep0.html) was a bright workflow choice
that was inspired by the analogous strategy in the Python community (PEPs). I
recommend this to any research group that values strategic planning, consensus,
and thoughtful development. A discussion of our workflow around these 
proposals can be found [here](http://fuelcycle.org/cep/cep1.html).

Fundamentally, a CEP is :

> a design document providing information to the Cyclus community, or describing a new
> feature or process for Cyclus and related projects in its ecosystem. The CEP
> should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale
> for the feature.

CEPs document major new features, community discussions, and documentation of theory or
design not captured by the in-code documentation. Because they are maintained
alongside the website source code in a version controlled repository,
provenance of the discussion surrounding their acceptance is maintained.

# Key tools

We use CMake to configure and build our software. Much more human readable than
the configuration files within the GNU autotools suite, CMake makes our lives
easier.

The continuous integration system, though difficult to implement due to build
issues, has decreased development time. It would not be possible without CMake,
GoogleTest, and Nose.

# Questions

## What does "reproducibility" mean to you?

A reproducible research product is one that has been sufficiently documented,
well-constructed, and preserved for its results to be recreated by some
external researcher or group.

## Why do you think that reproducibility in your domain is important?

My domain, nuclear engineering, is one where precision and accuracy are both of
utmost importance to both human and environmental outcomes. Any conclusions
drawn by science can only make an impact in the real world if they can meet the
standards set out by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. For this,
reproducibility is paramount.

## How or where did you learn about reproducibility?

I learned these practices primarily from my advisor, Paul P.H. Wilson at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison. I also learned from colleagues in The Hacker
Within, the Scientific Python community, and Software Carpentry.

## What do you see as the major challenges to doing reproducible research in your domain, and do you have any suggestions?

One major problem is export control. Making software and data open source is
restricted by the US Department of Energy, in some cases.

## What do you view as the major incentives for doing reproducible research?

- **Fear.** The fear of retractions due to faulty software or data can be
  reduced by enforcing transparent reproducible practices, which tend to reduce
  the likelihood of being accused of scientific fraud.
- **Surprise.** Six months after a paper is submitted, the surprise of no
  longer recalling your own thought process is unpleasant. To avoid it,
  reproducible practices can help you reproduce your present work in the future.
- **Ruthless Efficiency.** The automation inherent in reproducible
  workflows, makes tweaking and re-running of simulations and analysis very
  efficient.
