case-studies/kram.md, before:

##### Title
Reproducible Workflows For Understanding Large Scale Ecological Effects Of Climate Change

##### Introduction
*Please answer these introductory questions for your case study in a few sentences.*

1) Who are you and what is your research field? Include your name, affiliation, discipline, and the background or context of your overall research that is necessary specifically to introduce your specific case study.

My name is [Karthik Ram](http://karthik.io) and I am a quantitative food web ecologist by training. I received my PhD in 2009 from the University of California, Davis. Since then I've studied the impacts of climate change on the rate of green up and the consequent effects on a large mammal food web, among various other projects. The Yellowstone project was my entry into data science, where I was thrust into the challenges of validating (reproducing) someone else's work before continuing on with my own research. During this time I also encountered various pain points, which led me to create my own version control system before I learned of the existence of Git. In my current job I've transition from a full-time research scientist to a hybrid role, where I spent part of my time on research activities but the rest on developing tools and workflows to support various stages of a reproducible research workflow which I describe below.

2) Define what the term "reproducibility" means to you generally and/or in the particular context of your case study.

In the broadest sense, reproducibility means that I would be able to read a paper in my area of expertise and be able to run another version of the study (and experiments described within) by following the methods and protocols described within that paper. In my specific context, clear instructions would allow me to implement an experimental design/setup using identical organisms and chemical reagents. After the experiment is completed and the data are entered, I would then be able to analyze my data using models and parameters, possibly even reusing code where such methods where implemented. This would allow me to obtain results and compare them to the original.



##### Workflow diagram

![workflow_karthik](http://i.imgur.com/TCHnDlI.png)

##### Workflow narrative

Even though this narrative does not describe any specific project that I work on, it captures the general workflow I employ for all my projects. With all of my messy, raw data ready, I spend considerable time simply exploring the data and making plenty of visualizations. This process allows me get a sense for any early quality issues with the data and the kinds of steps I will need to employ to make the data usable for analysis. All of the code I use for this process (usually `R`), along with the outputs (rendered markdown and figures using packages such as `ggplot2` and `knitr/rmarkdown`) are committed to a scratch GitHub repository. This allows me to share early insights into my data with my collaborators. This process is highly iterative, and I generate various visualizations (across multiple branches) to gain a better insight into my data. This process takes me a few weeks as I multitask other projects. Close collaborators, and unwitting Twitter followers weigh in during this time.

During this process I also document any data cleaning steps I'll need to undertake before I begin any data analysis steps. At this time I also deposit my raw, unprocessed data into a persistent repository such as figshare, or a Zenodo collection, and obtain a permanent identifier. 

I simultaneously start writing code to clean my data using a scripted workflow which also involves mostly R. I sometimes use a bash script or two to pre-process the data using old unix tools like `sed` and `awk` but with recent developments in the R toolkit (`data.table`, `dplyr`, `tidyr`, and `rvest`) I rely less and less on my bash scripts. These scripts are called inside a Make file, which allows me to generate my cleaned datasets at any time with a simple command line call e.g. `make clean_data`. At this time I also start the process of creating a separate library for the project to capture the right versions of my tool dependencies, such that further updates to my computer don't affect the reproducibility of my work. In the case of `R`, I use a library called `packrat` to accomplish this. Once my data are cleaned, I deposit them back at the same identifier on the persistent data repository and include the DOI in the text of my paper.

The data analysis and modeling steps vary based on a project to project basis as some involve simulations on a cluster. For smaller projects, a handful of scripts accomplish this process. If any of my code is reusable in more than one step, I capture these into common functions, and sometimes convert this into a separate package. This allows me to further modularize my code.
For projects that involve simulations on clusters, I create scripts that work on smaller examples for local testing, with full version that run on HPC and write out my results.

Somewhere along the way, I also begin a Rmarkdown file, i.e. my manuscript, which is merely a markdown file with embedded R code captured inside code fences with some metadata. In addition to including small snippets of code, I am also able to source in larger chunks of code from my scripts without cluttering my document. The manuscript is also rendered from my Makefile frequently. I also include additional code to turn the `Rmarkdown` → `markdown` → `PDF` (using `Pandoc`), which gives me a sense for the how the final manuscript might look line. All of the code, figures, and raw/rendered markdown files are committed to my manuscript's GitHub repository. I (git)ignore large intermediate files that could easily be generated again in the future. As an open scientist, I leave the manuscript publicly accessible in my (or collaborators') GitHub repositories. GitHub now renders both the PDF, and also both the unparsed markdown (RMarkdown) and the markdown files on the browser, allowing anyone to review my work in progress. 

For citations, I use the `knitcitations` R package to embed dois into my text, which are automatically rendered into full parsed citations and a bibliography during the Make process.


##### Pain points

My two biggest pain points are black box data, and unscripted steps. Despite my best efforts, some steps (especially when working with novice programmer collaborators) are done using proprietary software and these are hard to automate. During various times I have received old versions because someone forgot to manually repeat a step.

In an ideal world, all my data would be a few simple queries away, allowing me to write concise scripts to retrieve the raw data before analysis. In reality, my data are a hodge podge of manually entered data, sensor derived data (often bulk downloads after a sign up process), and some data retrieved via APIs. I try to ease this process by depositing all of my raw data into either institutional or other repositories so that others can replicate my research.


##### Key benefits
The key benefits are that someone could clone my work and with the right system configuration (broadly defined) run my entire workflow, from raw data to cleaned data, simulations and analyses, all the way to manuscript generation and citation formatting in a single step. My work almost always includes a clear `README` file describing the process. The one hurdle is that it requires someone with moderate technical competence to repeat this process.

##### Key tools 

I've outlined my major tools inline but briefly:
Programming tools: R, sed, awk, Make, Git, Pandoc
Services: GitHub, Zenodo, figshare, crossref, Mendeley

Commit message:

Clarified Green up, and other terms such as figshare/Zenodo. Fixed few typos.

case-studies/kram.md, after:

##### Title
Reproducible Workflows For Understanding Large Scale Ecological Effects Of Climate Change

##### Introduction
*Please answer these introductory questions for your case study in a few sentences.*

1) Who are you and what is your research field? Include your name, affiliation, discipline, and the background or context of your overall research that is necessary specifically to introduce your specific case study.

My name is [Karthik Ram](http://karthik.io) and I am a quantitative food web ecologist by training. I received my PhD in 2009 from the University of California, Davis. Since then I've studied the impacts of climate change on the rate at which the landscape greens up in spring time, and the consequent effects on a large mammal food web, among various other projects. The Yellowstone project was my entry into data science, where I was thrust into the challenges of validating (reproducing) someone else's work before continuing on with my own research. During this time I also encountered various pain points, which led me to create my own version control system before I learned of the existence of Git. In my current job I've transition from a full-time research scientist to a hybrid role, where I spent part of my time on research activities but the rest on developing tools and workflows to support various stages of a reproducible research workflow which I describe below.

2) Define what the term "reproducibility" means to you generally and/or in the particular context of your case study.

In the broadest sense, reproducibility means that I would be able to read a paper in my area of expertise and be able to run another version of the study (and experiments described within) by following the methods and protocols described within that paper. In my specific context, clear instructions would allow me to implement an experimental design/setup using identical organisms and chemical reagents. After the experiment is completed and the data are entered, I would then be able to analyze my data using models and parameters, possibly even reusing code where such methods where implemented. This would allow me to obtain results and compare them to the original.



##### Workflow diagram

![workflow_karthik](http://i.imgur.com/TCHnDlI.png)

##### Workflow narrative

Even though this narrative does not describe any specific project that I work on, it captures the general workflow I employ for all my projects. With all of my messy, raw data ready, I spend considerable time on exploratory data analysis during which I generate several visualizations. This process allows me get a sense for any early quality issues with the data and the kinds of steps I will need to employ to make the data usable for analysis. All of the code I use for this process (usually `R`), along with the outputs (rendered markdown and figures using packages such as `ggplot2` and `knitr/rmarkdown`) are committed to a scratch GitHub repository. This allows me to share early insights into my data with my collaborators. This process is highly iterative, and I generate various visualizations (across multiple branches) to gain a better insight into my data. This process takes me a few weeks as I multi task other projects. During this time, project collaborators and various others, including my Twitter followers, provide constructive feedback.

During this process I also document any data cleaning steps I'll need to undertake before I begin any data analysis steps. At this time I also deposit my raw, unprocessed data into a persistent repository such as figshare, or a Zenodo collection, and obtain a permanent identifier. figshare is a private company that provides free data archiving to individual users, Zenodo is a EU funded research archive that allows scientists to deposit various types of digital objects, including software and code.

I simultaneously start writing code to clean my data using a scripted workflow which also involves mostly R. I sometimes use a bash script or two to pre-process the data using old unix tools like `sed` and `awk` but with recent developments in the R toolkit (`data.table`, `dplyr`, `tidyr`, and `rvest`) I rely less and less on my bash scripts. These scripts are called inside a Make file, which allows me to generate my cleaned datasets at any time with a simple command line call e.g. `make clean_data`. At this time I also start the process of creating a separate library for the project to capture the right versions of my tool dependencies, such that further updates to my computer don't affect the reproducibility of my work. In the case of `R`, I use a library called `packrat` to accomplish this. Once my data are cleaned, I deposit them back at the same identifier on the persistent data repository and include the DOI in the text of my paper.

The data analysis and modeling steps vary based on a project to project basis as some involve simulations on a cluster. For smaller projects, a handful of scripts accomplish this process. If any of my code is reusable in more than one step, I capture these into common functions, and sometimes convert this into a separate package. This allows me to further modularize my code.
For projects that involve simulations on clusters, I create scripts that work on smaller examples for local testing, with full version that run on HPC and write out my results.

Somewhere along the way, I also begin a Rmarkdown file, i.e. my manuscript, which is merely a markdown file with embedded R code captured inside code fences with some metadata. In addition to including small snippets of code, I am also able to source in larger chunks of code from my scripts without cluttering my document. The manuscript is also rendered from my Makefile frequently. I also include additional code to turn the `Rmarkdown` → `markdown` → `PDF` (using `Pandoc`), which gives me a sense for the how the final manuscript might look line. All of the code, figures, and raw/rendered markdown files are committed to my manuscript's GitHub repository. I (git)ignore large intermediate files that could easily be generated again in the future. As an open scientist, I leave the manuscript publicly accessible in my (or collaborators') GitHub repositories. GitHub now renders both the PDF, and also both the unparsed markdown (RMarkdown) and the markdown files on the browser, allowing anyone to review my work in progress. 

For citations, I use the `knitcitations` R package to embed DOIs into my text, which are automatically rendered into full parsed citations and a bibliography during the Make process.


##### Pain points

My two biggest pain points are black box data, and unscripted steps. Despite my best efforts, some steps (especially when working with novice programmer collaborators) are done using proprietary software and these are hard to automate. During various times I have received old versions because someone forgot to manually repeat a step.

In an ideal world, all my data would be a few simple queries away, allowing me to write concise scripts to retrieve the raw data before analysis. In reality, my data are a hodge podge of manually entered data, sensor derived data (often bulk downloads after a sign up process), and some data retrieved via APIs. I try to ease this process by depositing all of my raw data into either institutional or other repositories so that others can replicate my research.


##### Key benefits
The key benefits are that someone could clone my work and with the right system configuration (broadly defined) run my entire workflow, from raw data to cleaned data, simulations and analyses, all the way to manuscript generation and citation formatting in a single step. My work almost always includes a clear `README` file describing the process. The one hurdle is that it requires someone with moderate technical competence to repeat this process.

##### Key tools 

I've outlined my major tools inline but briefly:
Programming tools: R, sed, awk, Make, Git, Pandoc
Services: GitHub, Zenodo, figshare, crossref, Mendeley
