case-studies/omesnard.md, before:

*Authors: Olivier Mesnard, Lorena A. Barba*

##### Introduction
*Please answer these introductory questions for your case study in a few sentences.*

1) Who are you and what is your research field? Include your name, affiliation, discipline, and the background or context of your overall research that is necessary specifically to introduce your specific case study.

We are members of a computational research group led by Prof. [Lorena Barba](http://lorenabarba.com) at the George Washington University in the department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. 
One of our research projects focuses on studying animal flight by means of unsteady simulations at low/moderate Reynolds numbers, using immersed-boundary methods.
The work we describe in this case study was executed by the first author, PhD student Olivier Mesnard, but it fits in a broader program of research involving other group members.
We do our best to accomplish reproducible research and have for years worked to improve our practices to achieve this goal.
According to the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto," pledged by Barba in 2012, all research code written in the group is under version control and open source, our data is open, and we publish open pre-prints of all our publications.
For the main results in a paper, we prepare file bundles with input and output data, plotting scripts and figure, and deposit them in the [figshare](https://figshare.com/authors/Lorena_A_Barba/97553) repository.
These conditions all apply to our previously published work in Krishnan et al. (2014), studying the aerodynamics of flying snakes.
This case study describes what happened when we set out to not just reproduce our previous results in Krishnan et al. (2014), but complete a full replication using different computational fluid dynamics (CFD) codes: a new code developed in our group, an open-source code developed by another group, and an open-source CFD library.


2) Define what the term "reproducibility" means to you generally and/or in the particular context of your case study.

The starting point for our understanding of reproducibility is contained in the pledge "Reproducibility PI Manifesto" (Barba, 2012) which includes these steps:

1. teaching group members about reproducibility;
2. maintaining all code and writing under version-control;
3. carrying out verification and validation and publishing the results;
4. for main results in a publication, sharing data, plotting scripts, and figures under CC-BY; 
5. uploading preprints to arXiv at the time of submission of a paper;
6. releasing code no later than the time of submission of a paper;
7. adding a "Reproducibility" statement to each publication;
8. keeping an up-to-date web presence.

Some of these items have to do with making our research materials and methods open access and discoverable. 
The core of this pledge is releasing the code, the data, and the analysis/visualization scripts. 
Already this can be time consuming and demanding.
Yet, we have come to consider these steps the most basic level of reproducible research.
On undertaking a full replication study of a previous publication by our research group, we came to realize how much more rigor is required to achieve this, in the context of computational fluid dynamics of unsteady flows.
We use the term "full replication" in the sense presented by Peng (2011), that is, completing an independent study using new methods to collect new data, arriving in the end at the same scientific findings.
In computational fluid dynamics, full replication of the findings can involve using a different code that implements the same numerical method, or a code that implements a different numerical method altogether but solves the same mathematical model.
Because we are solving the Navier-Stokes equations—an unsteady and nonlinear model—certain problem scenarios can present particular challenges to replication.

##### Workflow diagram

The core of your case study is a diagrammatic workflow sketch, which depicts your the entire pipeline of your workflow. Think of this like a circuit diagram: boxes represent steps, tools, or other disjoint components, and arrows show how outputs of particular steps feed as inputs to others. This diagram will be complemented by a textual narrative.

We recommend the site draw.io for creating this diagram, or you are also welcome to sketch this by hand. While creating your diagram, be sure to consider:

* specialized tools and where they enter your workflow
* the "state" of the data at each stage
* collaborators
* version control repos
* products produced at various stages (graphics, summaries, etc)
* databases
* whitepapers
* customers

Each of the two example case studies include a workflow diagram you can also use for guidance.

Please save your diagram alongside this completed case study template.

![workflow_diagram](omesnard.png)

##### Workflow narrative

Referring to your diagram, describe your workflow for this specific project, from soup to nuts. Imagine walking a friend or a colleague through the basic steps, paying particular attention to links between steps. Don't forget to include "messy parts", loops, aborted efforts, and failures.

It may be helpful to consider the following questions, where interesting, applicable, and non-obvious from context. For each part of your workflow:

* **Frequency:** How often does the step happen and how long does it take?
* **Who:** Which members of your team participate (or not)?
* **Manual/Automated:** Is the step automated or does it involve human intervention (if so, is it recorded)?
* **Tools:** Which software or online tools are used in the step? How are they used?

In addition to detailing the steps of the workflow, you may wish to consider the following questions about the workflow as a whole:

* **Data:** Is your raw data online?
   * Is it citeable?
   * Does the license allow external researchers to publish a replication/confirmation of your published work?
* **Software:** Is the software online?
   * Is there documentation?
   * Are there tests?
   * Are there example input files alongside the code?
* **Processing:** Is your data processing workflow online?
   * Are the scripts documented?
   * Would an external researcher know what order to run them in?
   * Would they know what parameters to use?

*(500-800 words)*

Our research lab developed over the years a consistent workflow that, we believe, leads to reproducible research.
Our previous published study in Krishnan et al. (2014) already satisfies the criteria of the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto" (Barba, 2012). 
[cuIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/cuIBM), the code used for that study, is version-controled and open source (hosted on GitHub); we completed a Validation & Verification study that is published openly on figshare; the data and main figures of the paper are also available on figshare under CC-BY.
Krishnan et al. (2014) studies the aerodynamics of flying snakes using an in-house solver for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations.
The solver applies an immersed-boundary projection method (Taira and Colonius, 2007) that requires the solution of a modified Poisson system on a structured Cartesian grid. 
It uses an iterative algorithm provided by an external linear-algebra library: the [CUSP]([CUSP](https://github.com/cusplibrary/cusplibrary) library to solve a linear system on a single GPU.

Here, we describe our effort to achieve full replication of our previous conclusions about the aerodynamic characteristics of the flying snakes' body cross-section.
We used a total of four CFD codes to reproduce and replicate our own findings on a case that involves a highly unsteady flow, dominated by vorticity.

The first code is a component of the well-known open-source CFD library, [OpenFOAM](http://www.openfoam.org/).
IcoFOAM is the incompressible laminar solver, applying the finite-volume method on an unstructured body-conforming mesh.
We chose IcoFOAM because it is widely used, open-source, and documented—both code documentation and a users' guide are available.
We found that the mesh quality as well as proper non-reflective boundary conditions were crucial in capturing the features of the wake generated by the snake body cross-section. 
In fact, the mesh generation step is most often what determines the quality of the solution, and some meshes would result in markedly different results.

We moved on to [IBAMR](https://github.com/ibamr/ibamr), an open-source software hosted on GitHub, mainly developed by [Boyce Griffith](http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~griffith/), aiming to reproduce our previous results wtih a different immersed-boundary formulation. 
IBAMR implements an immersed-boundary method on a Cartesian grid, allowing adaptive mesh refinement by means of the [SAMRAI](https://computation.llnl.gov/project/SAMRAI) library, and solving the linear systems of equations by means of the [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc) library.
Bhalla et al. (2013) published a detailed validation of the software, while various examples can be found included in the code repository.

The [cuIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/cuIBM) and [PetIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/PetIBM) codes are both being developed in our research lab and implement the same immersed-boundary method (Taira and Colonius, 2007).
The GitHub code repositories include code documentation with [Doxygen](www.doxygen.org), users' documentation (on the GitHub wiki), as well as basic examples/tutorials.
cuIBM uses [CUSP](https://github.com/cusplibrary/cusplibrary), an open-source library for sparse linear algebra on CUDA architecture GPUs. We used cuIBM again to confirm the reproducibility of our published findings.
The input parameters are available in the code repository while reproducibility packages can be downloaded from figshare. 
But it's important to remark that we had to use the _same version_ of the code, with the _same version_ of the linear-algebra library to re-obtain the same numeric answers.
In PetIBM, we implemented the same immersed-boundary method, but using the [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/) library to solve the problem on a distributed-memory machine. 
Although the mathematical formulation is exactly the same in cuIBM and PetIBM, we observed that using a different linear algebra library changed the conclusions about the snake aerodynamics.

We use Python to automate pre- and post-processing steps. All scripts are version-controlled, the code is documented and allows command-line arguments (to avoid code modification from users). 
We also took advantage of the Python interpreter included in the visualization tools [Paraview](http://www.paraview.org/) and [VisIt](https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation/computer-codes/visit/) to automate the post-processing part of the numerical solution from OpenFOAM and IBAMR. 
In addition to that, we used Jupyter Notebooks and Markdown files to present project advances during regular meetings—and our group-meetings notes are version-controlled and hosted on GitHub.

Finally, the manuscript is written using LaTeX and version-controlled in its own GitHub repository to facilitate collaboration between authors. 
To advocate open-science, the manuscript will be first available on arXiv. We will also provide a reproducibility package for all simulations and figures reported in the manuscript. 
This package includes the version of the software (as well as the one of its dependencies), the input parameters (for both the simulation and the post-processing), information related to machine architecture, and the necessary scripts to run and post-process the simulation.

*References*:
- Bhalla, A. P. S., Bale, R., Griffith, B. E., & Patankar, N. A. (2013). A unified mathematical framework and an adaptive numerical method for fluid–structure interaction with rigid, deforming, and elastic bodies. Journal of Computational Physics, 250, 446-476.
- Krishnan, A., Socha, J. J., Vlachos, P. P., & Barba, L. A. (2014). Lift and wakes of flying snakes. Physics of Fluids, 26(3), 031901.
- Taira, K., & Colonius, T. (2007). The immersed boundary method: a projection approach. Journal of Computational Physics, 225(2), 2118-2137.

##### Pain points
*Describe in detail the steps of a reproducible workflow which you consider to be particularly painful. How do you handle these? How do you avoid them? (200-400 words)*

We used four different codes in our endeavor to fully replicate our own previous findings, dealing with hundreds of simulations.
For each simulation, we computed the flow over 80 non-dimensional time-units. The run-time varies between 1 and 3 days and the numerical solutions each generate between 3.5 and 16 gigabytes of data.
Most of the simulations were run on an HPC cluster at the George Washington University, and the solutions were then moved to several different local desktop machines for post-processing and storage.
Keeping a detailed, up-to-date, and version-controlled lab notebook proved to be vital to track all simulations.
Becoming familiar with new software required a substantial amount of time—it took longer to familiarize ourselves with codes with poor users' documentation.
Finally, we also spent considerable time to develop automated scripts for analyzing the numerical solutions resulting from different codes (producing different output formats).


##### Key benefits
*Discuss one or several sections of your workflow that you feel makes your approach better than the "normal" non-reproducible workflow that others might use in your field. What does your workflow do better than the one used by your lesser-skilled colleagues and students, and why? What would you want them to learn from your example? (200-400 words)*

##### Key tools
*If applicable, provide a detailed description of a particular specialized tool that plays a key role in making your workflow reproducible, if you think that the tool might be of broader interest or relevance to a general audience. (200-400 words)*

We use the version-control hosting platform GitHub to support our reproducible workflow. 
GitHub greatly facilitates collaboration when developing numerical codes and documentation. 
The platform also allows creating wiki pages for users' documentation. 
We use GitHub to write manuscripts, to record our group-meetings, and to store teaching materials.
We also extensively use Python to automate analysis and post-processing.

##### General questions about reproducibility

*Please provide short answers (a few sentences each) to these general questions about reproducibility and scientific research. Rough ideas are appropriate here, as these will not be published with the case study. Please feel free to answer all or only some of these questions.*

1) Why do you think that reproducibility in your domain is important?

In computational science, codes and data used to publish results should be version-controlled and open-source to facilitate reproducibility.
Reproducibility is a chance to prove that you can be trusted as a scientific researcher. 
Ensuring that a manuscript (along with the data used to generate the figures) is reproducible makes it easier for others to corroborate (or reject) a scientific hypothesis. 
Donoho and co-authors (2009) mentioned that we develop codes so that they can be used again by strangers and defined strangers as "anyone who doesn't possess our current short-term memory" (including ourself in some years).
We believe that reproducible research would prevent scientists to reinvent the wheel.

2) How or where did you learn the reproducible practices described in your case study? Mentors, classes, workshops, etc.

Our advisor , Prof. Lorena Barba, plays a major role in raising awareness about reproducible research. Incoming students joining our research lab must start by learning the different tools mentioned in the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto".
The [Software Carpentry Foundation](http://software-carpentry.org/) (through workshops and online ressources) also contributed to improve our workflow to achieve reproducible research.

3) What do you see as the major pitfalls to doing reproducible research in your domain, and do you have any suggestions for working around these? Examples could include legal, logistical, human, or technical challenges.

Reproducible research can be time-consuming, requires rigorous methods and organization.
At various moments during the project, we had to pause and ask ourself if our research was currently reproducible.

4) What do you view as the major incentives for doing reproducible research?

Making your research reproducible -- providing reproducibility packages along with the manuscript -- is a way to showcase your skills, an excellent communications medium to convey ideas, and a fast way to get feedbacks on your work. 
If the research community is inclined to put more effort in doing reproducible work, it would prevent scientists from re-inventing the wheel.

5) Are there any broad reproducibility best practices that you'd recommend for researchers in your field?

Again, we insist that a proper lab notebook is fundamental to record your research.
We also tend to avoid GUIs as much as possible and prefer to script everything so that analysis can be automated, reproducible, and recorded.
This kind be time-consuming but surely beneficial in the term of a research project.

6) Would you recommend any specific websites, training courses, or books for learning more about reproducibility?

* Barba, L. A. (13 December 2012). "Reproducibility PI Manifesto", 10.6084/m9.figshare.104539.
* Donoho, D. L., Maleki, A., Rahman, I. U., Shahram, M., & Stodden, V. (2009). Reproducible research in computational harmonic analysis. Computing in Science & Engineering, 11(1), 8-18.
* Leek, J. T., & Peng, R. D. (2015). Opinion: Reproducible research can still be wrong: Adopting a prevention approach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(6), 1645-1646.
* Madeyski, L., & Kitchenham, B. A. (2015). Reproducible Research–What, Why and How. Wroclaw University of Technology, PRE W, 8.
* Peng, R. D. (2011). Reproducible research in computational science. Science (New York, Ny), 334(6060), 1226.
Presentation for a talk given at the ICERM workshop "Reproducibility in Computational and Experimental Mathematics". Published on figshare under CC-BY.
* [Reproducible Research -- Coursera MOOC](https://www.coursera.org/learn/reproducible-research).
* Sandve, G. K., Nekrutenko, A., Taylor, J., & Hovig, E. (2013). Ten simple rules for reproducible computational research.
* [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org).
* Software Testing -- Udacity MOOC (https://www.udacity.com/).
* Stark, P. B. (2015). Science is "show me", not "trust me". [Blog post](http://www.bitss.org/2015/12/31/science-is-show-me-not-trust-me)
* Vitek, J., & Kalibera, T. (2011, October). Repeatability, reproducibility, and rigor in systems research. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM international conference on Embedded software (pp. 33-38). ACM.

Commit message:

rework opening of project narrative
give clue that there were difficulties, and that challenges are specific to application field

case-studies/omesnard.md, after:

*Authors: Olivier Mesnard, Lorena A. Barba*

##### Introduction
*Please answer these introductory questions for your case study in a few sentences.*

1) Who are you and what is your research field? Include your name, affiliation, discipline, and the background or context of your overall research that is necessary specifically to introduce your specific case study.

We are members of a computational research group led by Prof. [Lorena Barba](http://lorenabarba.com) at the George Washington University in the department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. 
One of our research projects focuses on studying animal flight by means of unsteady simulations at low/moderate Reynolds numbers, using immersed-boundary methods.
The work we describe in this case study was executed by the first author, PhD student Olivier Mesnard, but it fits in a broader program of research involving other group members.
We do our best to accomplish reproducible research and have for years worked to improve our practices to achieve this goal.
According to the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto," pledged by Barba in 2012, all research code written in the group is under version control and open source, our data is open, and we publish open pre-prints of all our publications.
For the main results in a paper, we prepare file bundles with input and output data, plotting scripts and figure, and deposit them in the [figshare](https://figshare.com/authors/Lorena_A_Barba/97553) repository.
These conditions all apply to our previously published work in Krishnan et al. (2014), studying the aerodynamics of flying snakes.
This case study describes what happened when we set out to not just reproduce our previous results in Krishnan et al. (2014), but complete a full replication using different computational fluid dynamics (CFD) codes: a new code developed in our group, an open-source code developed by another group, and an open-source CFD library.


2) Define what the term "reproducibility" means to you generally and/or in the particular context of your case study.

The starting point for our understanding of reproducibility is contained in the pledge "Reproducibility PI Manifesto" (Barba, 2012) which includes these steps:

1. teaching group members about reproducibility;
2. maintaining all code and writing under version-control;
3. carrying out verification and validation and publishing the results;
4. for main results in a publication, sharing data, plotting scripts, and figures under CC-BY; 
5. uploading preprints to arXiv at the time of submission of a paper;
6. releasing code no later than the time of submission of a paper;
7. adding a "Reproducibility" statement to each publication;
8. keeping an up-to-date web presence.

Some of these items have to do with making our research materials and methods open access and discoverable. 
The core of this pledge is releasing the code, the data, and the analysis/visualization scripts. 
Already this can be time consuming and demanding.
Yet, we have come to consider these steps the most basic level of reproducible research.
On undertaking a full replication study of a previous publication by our research group, we came to realize how much more rigor is required to achieve this, in the context of computational fluid dynamics of unsteady flows.
We use the term "full replication" in the sense presented by Peng (2011), that is, completing an independent study using new methods to collect new data, arriving in the end at the same scientific findings.
In computational fluid dynamics, full replication of the findings can involve using a different code that implements the same numerical method, or a code that implements a different numerical method altogether but solves the same mathematical model.
Because we are solving the Navier-Stokes equations—an unsteady and nonlinear model—certain problem scenarios can present particular challenges to replication.

##### Workflow diagram

The core of your case study is a diagrammatic workflow sketch, which depicts your the entire pipeline of your workflow. Think of this like a circuit diagram: boxes represent steps, tools, or other disjoint components, and arrows show how outputs of particular steps feed as inputs to others. This diagram will be complemented by a textual narrative.

We recommend the site draw.io for creating this diagram, or you are also welcome to sketch this by hand. While creating your diagram, be sure to consider:

* specialized tools and where they enter your workflow
* the "state" of the data at each stage
* collaborators
* version control repos
* products produced at various stages (graphics, summaries, etc)
* databases
* whitepapers
* customers

Each of the two example case studies include a workflow diagram you can also use for guidance.

Please save your diagram alongside this completed case study template.

![workflow_diagram](omesnard.png)

##### Workflow narrative

Referring to your diagram, describe your workflow for this specific project, from soup to nuts. Imagine walking a friend or a colleague through the basic steps, paying particular attention to links between steps. Don't forget to include "messy parts", loops, aborted efforts, and failures.

It may be helpful to consider the following questions, where interesting, applicable, and non-obvious from context. For each part of your workflow:

* **Frequency:** How often does the step happen and how long does it take?
* **Who:** Which members of your team participate (or not)?
* **Manual/Automated:** Is the step automated or does it involve human intervention (if so, is it recorded)?
* **Tools:** Which software or online tools are used in the step? How are they used?

In addition to detailing the steps of the workflow, you may wish to consider the following questions about the workflow as a whole:

* **Data:** Is your raw data online?
   * Is it citeable?
   * Does the license allow external researchers to publish a replication/confirmation of your published work?
* **Software:** Is the software online?
   * Is there documentation?
   * Are there tests?
   * Are there example input files alongside the code?
* **Processing:** Is your data processing workflow online?
   * Are the scripts documented?
   * Would an external researcher know what order to run them in?
   * Would they know what parameters to use?

*(500-800 words)*

Our research lab has developed over the years a consistent workflow that, we believe, leads to reproducible research.
A previous study coming out of our lab, published in Krishnan et al. (2014), already satisfies the criteria of the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto" (Barba, 2012). 
[cuIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/cuIBM), the code used for that study, is version-controled and open source (hosted on GitHub); we completed a [Validation & Verification study](http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.92789) that is published openly on figshare; the data and main figures of the paper are also available on figshare under CC-BY, and the paper [pre-print](http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.2969) is available on arXiv (revised post peer review).
Here, we describe our effort to achieve full replication of our previous conclusions in Krishnan et al. (2014) about the aerodynamic characteristics of the flying snakes' body cross-section.
We used a total of four CFD codes to reproduce and replicate our own findings on a scenario of a highly unsteady flow, dominated by vorticity. In every case, there were failures and difficulties, leading to improvements in our workflow and conclusions about the special challenges for reproducibility in our application scenario.

Krishnan et al. (2014) studies the aerodynamics of flying snakes using an in-house solver for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations.
The solver applies an immersed-boundary projection method (Taira and Colonius, 2007) that requires the solution of a modified Poisson system on a structured Cartesian grid. 
It uses an iterative algorithm provided by an external linear-algebra library: the [CUSP]([CUSP](https://github.com/cusplibrary/cusplibrary) library to solve a linear system on a single GPU.



The first code is a component of the well-known open-source CFD library, [OpenFOAM](http://www.openfoam.org/).
IcoFOAM is the incompressible laminar solver, applying the finite-volume method on an unstructured body-conforming mesh.
We chose IcoFOAM because it is widely used, open-source, and documented—both code documentation and a users' guide are available.
We found that the mesh quality as well as proper non-reflective boundary conditions were crucial in capturing the features of the wake generated by the snake body cross-section. 
In fact, the mesh generation step is most often what determines the quality of the solution, and some meshes would result in markedly different results.

We moved on to [IBAMR](https://github.com/ibamr/ibamr), an open-source software hosted on GitHub, mainly developed by [Boyce Griffith](http://www.cims.nyu.edu/~griffith/), aiming to reproduce our previous results wtih a different immersed-boundary formulation. 
IBAMR implements an immersed-boundary method on a Cartesian grid, allowing adaptive mesh refinement by means of the [SAMRAI](https://computation.llnl.gov/project/SAMRAI) library, and solving the linear systems of equations by means of the [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc) library.
Bhalla et al. (2013) published a detailed validation of the software, while various examples can be found included in the code repository.

The [cuIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/cuIBM) and [PetIBM](https://github.com/barbagroup/PetIBM) codes are both being developed in our research lab and implement the same immersed-boundary method (Taira and Colonius, 2007).
The GitHub code repositories include code documentation with [Doxygen](www.doxygen.org), users' documentation (on the GitHub wiki), as well as basic examples/tutorials.
cuIBM uses [CUSP](https://github.com/cusplibrary/cusplibrary), an open-source library for sparse linear algebra on CUDA architecture GPUs. We used cuIBM again to confirm the reproducibility of our published findings.
The input parameters are available in the code repository while reproducibility packages can be downloaded from figshare. 
But it's important to remark that we had to use the _same version_ of the code, with the _same version_ of the linear-algebra library to re-obtain the same numeric answers.
In PetIBM, we implemented the same immersed-boundary method, but using the [PETSc](http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/) library to solve the problem on a distributed-memory machine. 
Although the mathematical formulation is exactly the same in cuIBM and PetIBM, we observed that using a different linear algebra library changed the conclusions about the snake aerodynamics.

We use Python to automate pre- and post-processing steps. All scripts are version-controlled, the code is documented and allows command-line arguments (to avoid code modification from users). 
We also took advantage of the Python interpreter included in the visualization tools [Paraview](http://www.paraview.org/) and [VisIt](https://wci.llnl.gov/simulation/computer-codes/visit/) to automate the post-processing part of the numerical solution from OpenFOAM and IBAMR. 
In addition to that, we used Jupyter Notebooks and Markdown files to present project advances during regular meetings—and our group-meetings notes are version-controlled and hosted on GitHub.

Finally, the manuscript is written using LaTeX and version-controlled in its own GitHub repository to facilitate collaboration between authors. 
To advocate open-science, the manuscript will be first available on arXiv. We will also provide a reproducibility package for all simulations and figures reported in the manuscript. 
This package includes the version of the software (as well as the one of its dependencies), the input parameters (for both the simulation and the post-processing), information related to machine architecture, and the necessary scripts to run and post-process the simulation.

*References*:
- Bhalla, A. P. S., Bale, R., Griffith, B. E., & Patankar, N. A. (2013). A unified mathematical framework and an adaptive numerical method for fluid–structure interaction with rigid, deforming, and elastic bodies. Journal of Computational Physics, 250, 446-476.
- Krishnan, A., Socha, J. J., Vlachos, P. P., & Barba, L. A. (2014). Lift and wakes of flying snakes. Physics of Fluids, 26(3), 031901.
- Taira, K., & Colonius, T. (2007). The immersed boundary method: a projection approach. Journal of Computational Physics, 225(2), 2118-2137.

##### Pain points
*Describe in detail the steps of a reproducible workflow which you consider to be particularly painful. How do you handle these? How do you avoid them? (200-400 words)*

We used four different codes in our endeavor to fully replicate our own previous findings, dealing with hundreds of simulations.
For each simulation, we computed the flow over 80 non-dimensional time-units. The run-time varies between 1 and 3 days and the numerical solutions each generate between 3.5 and 16 gigabytes of data.
Most of the simulations were run on an HPC cluster at the George Washington University, and the solutions were then moved to several different local desktop machines for post-processing and storage.
Keeping a detailed, up-to-date, and version-controlled lab notebook proved to be vital to track all simulations.
Becoming familiar with new software required a substantial amount of time—it took longer to familiarize ourselves with codes with poor users' documentation.
Finally, we also spent considerable time to develop automated scripts for analyzing the numerical solutions resulting from different codes (producing different output formats).


##### Key benefits
*Discuss one or several sections of your workflow that you feel makes your approach better than the "normal" non-reproducible workflow that others might use in your field. What does your workflow do better than the one used by your lesser-skilled colleagues and students, and why? What would you want them to learn from your example? (200-400 words)*

##### Key tools
*If applicable, provide a detailed description of a particular specialized tool that plays a key role in making your workflow reproducible, if you think that the tool might be of broader interest or relevance to a general audience. (200-400 words)*

We use the version-control hosting platform GitHub to support our reproducible workflow. 
GitHub greatly facilitates collaboration when developing numerical codes and documentation. 
The platform also allows creating wiki pages for users' documentation. 
We use GitHub to write manuscripts, to record our group-meetings, and to store teaching materials.
We also extensively use Python to automate analysis and post-processing.

##### General questions about reproducibility

*Please provide short answers (a few sentences each) to these general questions about reproducibility and scientific research. Rough ideas are appropriate here, as these will not be published with the case study. Please feel free to answer all or only some of these questions.*

1) Why do you think that reproducibility in your domain is important?

In computational science, codes and data used to publish results should be version-controlled and open-source to facilitate reproducibility.
Reproducibility is a chance to prove that you can be trusted as a scientific researcher. 
Ensuring that a manuscript (along with the data used to generate the figures) is reproducible makes it easier for others to corroborate (or reject) a scientific hypothesis. 
Donoho and co-authors (2009) mentioned that we develop codes so that they can be used again by strangers and defined strangers as "anyone who doesn't possess our current short-term memory" (including ourself in some years).
We believe that reproducible research would prevent scientists to reinvent the wheel.

2) How or where did you learn the reproducible practices described in your case study? Mentors, classes, workshops, etc.

Our advisor , Prof. Lorena Barba, plays a major role in raising awareness about reproducible research. Incoming students joining our research lab must start by learning the different tools mentioned in the "Reproducibility PI Manifesto".
The [Software Carpentry Foundation](http://software-carpentry.org/) (through workshops and online ressources) also contributed to improve our workflow to achieve reproducible research.

3) What do you see as the major pitfalls to doing reproducible research in your domain, and do you have any suggestions for working around these? Examples could include legal, logistical, human, or technical challenges.

Reproducible research can be time-consuming, requires rigorous methods and organization.
At various moments during the project, we had to pause and ask ourself if our research was currently reproducible.

4) What do you view as the major incentives for doing reproducible research?

Making your research reproducible -- providing reproducibility packages along with the manuscript -- is a way to showcase your skills, an excellent communications medium to convey ideas, and a fast way to get feedbacks on your work. 
If the research community is inclined to put more effort in doing reproducible work, it would prevent scientists from re-inventing the wheel.

5) Are there any broad reproducibility best practices that you'd recommend for researchers in your field?

Again, we insist that a proper lab notebook is fundamental to record your research.
We also tend to avoid GUIs as much as possible and prefer to script everything so that analysis can be automated, reproducible, and recorded.
This kind be time-consuming but surely beneficial in the term of a research project.

6) Would you recommend any specific websites, training courses, or books for learning more about reproducibility?

* Barba, L. A. (13 December 2012). "Reproducibility PI Manifesto", 10.6084/m9.figshare.104539.
* Donoho, D. L., Maleki, A., Rahman, I. U., Shahram, M., & Stodden, V. (2009). Reproducible research in computational harmonic analysis. Computing in Science & Engineering, 11(1), 8-18.
* Leek, J. T., & Peng, R. D. (2015). Opinion: Reproducible research can still be wrong: Adopting a prevention approach. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(6), 1645-1646.
* Madeyski, L., & Kitchenham, B. A. (2015). Reproducible Research–What, Why and How. Wroclaw University of Technology, PRE W, 8.
* Peng, R. D. (2011). Reproducible research in computational science. Science (New York, Ny), 334(6060), 1226.
Presentation for a talk given at the ICERM workshop "Reproducibility in Computational and Experimental Mathematics". Published on figshare under CC-BY.
* [Reproducible Research -- Coursera MOOC](https://www.coursera.org/learn/reproducible-research).
* Sandve, G. K., Nekrutenko, A., Taylor, J., & Hovig, E. (2013). Ten simple rules for reproducible computational research.
* [Software Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org).
* Software Testing -- Udacity MOOC (https://www.udacity.com/).
* Stark, P. B. (2015). Science is "show me", not "trust me". [Blog post](http://www.bitss.org/2015/12/31/science-is-show-me-not-trust-me)
* Vitek, J., & Kalibera, T. (2011, October). Repeatability, reproducibility, and rigor in systems research. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM international conference on Embedded software (pp. 33-38). ACM.
